Hello.
Hello, and welcome to English.
Learning for curious minds by Leonardo English, the show where you can listen to fascinating stories
and learn weird and wonderful things about the world at the same time as improving your English.
I'm Allister budge.
And today we are going to be talking about what happens when a language dies.
There are almost 8 billion people on the planet and we speak 7,000 different languages.
Yet languages are dying out fast and linguists believe that half of
the languages spoken today will not exist by the end of the century.
It is a sad truth.
And today we are going to talk about why languages die,
which languages are dying and what we can do about it.
Before we get right into the episode though.
I just wanted to remind those of you listening to this episode on your favorite podcast
app, that you can get the subtitles transcript and give a Capri for this episode.
Plus a load of extra bonus episodes on our website, which is Leonardo in besch.com.
In case you hadn't checked this out yet.
We also do monthly meetups, a Q and a sessions, which are a lot of fun.
We just had the last one last week on accents in
English and had members joining from all over the world.
So if you would like to improve your English in a more interesting way, then I
definitely recommend checking out the website, which is Leonardo english.com.
Okay, then let's get cracking and talk about dying languages.
Language is just the most magical thing.
It's what sets us apart from animals.
It allows us to communicate with one another, to tell
stories, to record our history, traditions, and culture.
It allows us to express ourselves to show who we truly are.
And as anyone who speaks more than one language knows
the language you speak is a big part of your identity.
You feel different when you speak a different language.
If English isn't your native language, which I guess
if you're listening to this podcast, it probably isn't.
Then you feel different when you speak in English, depending on your level and experience.
How you feel might change if you aren't that confident in English, then I imagine
it can feel frustrating, limiting that if you aren't confident in English, then I
imagine it can feel frustrating and limiting that you can't say the same things in
English with the same fluency as you would be able to do in your native language.
And even if you are amazingly fluent in English or even bilingual,
the language you speak for most people makes you feel different.
You behave slightly differently.
You might use one language in one situation or to communicate with one group of people.
No language perfectly translates from one to the other.
So the language we speak has huge importance over and above it just being a means of communication.
So what happens to people when they can't communicate in the
language, they want to, what happens to the cultures and countries?
When the original language of its people dies out, what happens
then this, as you may know, Isn't just a theoretical question.
In the past hundred years, the world has lost about one language every three months.
So that's around 400 languages wiped away, disappeared.
And as a population, we are moving away from having this huge variety of different languages.
To having a small selection of languages that are native to a large proportion
of people and understandable to even more indeed, about two thirds of the world.
Indeed, about two thirds of the world's population speaks just
12 languages out of the 7,000 or so different languages spoken.
Different languages that exist in the world.
So almost 70% of the population speaks a total of less than 0.2% of the languages in the world.
You can probably guess the most dominant languages.
There's Mandarin, Spanish, English, Hindi, Bengali, Portuguese,
Russian, Japanese, Western Punjabi Mirafi Telegu and will Chinese.
These languages have come to dominate and endanger the other almost 700 languages.
You might say, well, it's only natural as more people speak a certain language.
It's understandable that.
People want their children to speak that language.
So they stopped speaking their own language at home.
And thus, these other languages eventually die out as people choose not to use them.
That may be true, but these dominant languages, haven't
only prospered because they have attracted people.
There have also been large efforts to crush smaller languages.
From doing things like outlawing the forbidding, the use of non-core
languages to actively persecuting speakers of different languages.
There has been a lot of activity aimed specifically at killing off less popular languages.
English of course is a prime example.
The British empire, forced people to speak English.
And the fact that the founding fathers of America were native English
speakers and chose to write the constitution in English meant that
meant that other native languages were pushed to one side.
And English became the dominant language for the world's dominant power.
If it weren't for things like this, you probably wouldn't be learning
English as it would never have reached such a globally dominant position.
But for centuries, the majority of people didn't care about
languages, dying out languages dying when their speakers dying.
And so by default, if there aren't speakers, if there aren't any speakers of the
language left, then there aren't many people that really care about that language.
And globally, we don't seem to really care about the fact
that there are so many endangered languages to be precise.
According to UNESCO, at least 43 of all languages spoken in the
world are endangered more than half, have fewer than 10,000 speakers.
A quarter have fewer than 1000 speakers and around 20 languages.
I only have one speaker left.
Now there are five different categories of endangered languages ranging
from vulnerable, which means that most children can speak the language,
but it's normally restricted to certain situations normally just at home.
And the final category is extinct.
Meaning there are no speakers left.
And the sad thing is.
And the sad thing is that for a lot of these languages
that are dying out, when the last person dies, that's it.
You can't just turn it back on again.
As fewer and fewer people speak a language, it's
hard to reverse the decline, fewer children learn it.
And the older people who do speak it won't live forever.
So purely from a.
Sounds of time.
Point of view, this situation naturally means that the number of speakers
reduces and tends to zero, but also the fewer speakers of a language that
do exist, the fewer opportunities, those people have to speak that language.
And as we all know, if you don't actually use a language, you start to speak less fluently in it.
And do you start to lose the language yourself?
And if you are the only speaker of a language and you don't have anyone left to
practice with, well, then that language is quickly on the path to becoming extinct.
There was a story a few years back about a village in Mexico, where there were only two
speakers left of a language called . So the only people that they could practice with,
there was a story a few years ago, about a village in Mexico, where there were
only two speakers left of a language called . So the only people that VA could
practice, I opened echo with where each other, but they hated each other.
They had had a disagreement and they weren't speaking so great was the disdain and hatred
that they held for one and not so great was the disdain and hatred that they held for one
another, that they wouldn't even speak for the sake of practicing this almost extinct language.
So the telecoms company Vodafone came along.
And help them become friends again, to save the language
and teach a new generation there's traditional language.
I up an echo, what an amazing story.
Right?
Unfortunately, it was too amazing to be true.
It was proved to be a completely made up story, a complete lie creators to promote Vodafone.
However, the situation it was talking about certainly does exist.
When people don't have anyone to practice a language with, and if they haven't taught anyone
else that language, then that language goes to the grieve with the death of its last speaker.
Unless there has been a conscious effort to protect it and to get a generation
of new speakers speaking that language, then this is exactly what happens.
Then this is exactly what happens.
And there have been some real success stories of languages that looked
like they were moving towards becoming extinct with the number of speakers
decreasing every year that have enjoyed a revival or rebirth in the UK.
For instance, you will know that we speak English.
And it is spoken by 98% of the population, but people
also speak Scotts Welsh, Scots, Gaelic, Irish Cornish.
There has been a concerted efforts in the UK to promote these languages
with them being taught in schools, used on road signs and in official
documentation, which has made available in other languages than English.
And in Hawaii, the local language Hawaiian was almost completely extinct by the end of the 1980s.
Some schools had banned it and English was strongly encouraged.
There were only a few hundred speakers left and it
looked like it was going to die out within a generation.
However, a few good souls decided to do something about it.
They opened schools and encouraged children to learn Hawaiian.
There are now about 25,000 fluent Hawaiian speakers, which of course is nothing compared to the
number of English speakers, but it is certainly enough to bring it out of the immediate danger zone.
But what happens when a language does really die though?
Well, there is one famous example of a language where all
its speakers did die, but the language today is thriving.
No, it's not Latin.
I don't think that people learning it in schools and
speaking it in the Vatican city can be considered thriving.
It is Hebrew.
The official language of it is Hebrew and official language of Israel.
Hebrew.
Hadn't been a spoken language for communication purposes since the second century ed, but had
been preserved in religious texts and it had been spoken in prayers and religious services.
But that was it.
People didn't speak it in their day to day lives.
Towards the end of the 19th century, there were large efforts to
revive the language and it is now spoken by 90% of Israeli Jews.
Interestingly enough, when the language was revived.
They had to come up with all these new words for things that just
didn't exist when the language stopped being spoken 1,700 years before.
So they had to invent entirely new words for things like the tomato, which
had only been introduced to Israel after having been brought back from the
Americas and they had to come up with a word for things like electricity.
Which obviously didn't exist in the second century.
So if there is enough, well, for whatever reason, just because a language looks
like it might die out, that process can be stopped and languages can flourish again.
Now.
Now in the modern era.
Now we have a plethora of advantages that previous generations didn't have.
It's very easy to record people speaking so we can preserve how to speak a language.
And the internet makes it easier than ever for people to connect with each
other, for speakers of different languages to come together and practice it,
or at least to help linguists understand how to preserve those languages.
However, despite all of these advantages, people need to want to do it.
Without the people that want to preserve the language for future generations, without the people
that want to preserve the language for future generations, there will be no preserving it.
The majority of the endangered languages are oral languages.
They often don't have written forms, which makes preserving them even harder.
If every English speaker on the planet died tomorrow, someone could relatively
easily figure out how to speak English because there is so much written in
English, but if nothing is written, then the language dies with its last speaker.
And this isn't a rare occurrence only.
Only around a third of all world languages have written
systems, a way of actually writing the language down.
You might be thinking, so what language is dying out?
It's just a natural part of the life cycle of the world.
Instead of spending money, encouraging people to speak them.
Why don't we invest in schools, hospitals, or teaching people a more useful language?
Like.
English or Spanish or Mandarin.
It also begs the question.
Why should we actually preserve anything?
Why should we preserve anything?
It also begs the question.
Why should we actually preserve anything from ancient
buildings to sculptures, to wildlife, to animals?
Should we interfere with the natural flow of things?
If you are approaching the subjects from a purely utilitarian point of view, Saying
that we should only seek to preserve things that have an immediate use for mankind.
Then you probably, then you probably, I don't think it's worth battling
to preserve a dying language, but then you shouldn't let's see any reason
to protect a beautiful fresco or to stop the pandas from dying out.
Languages, in my opinion, at least give us just the most amazing insights into how
people, cultures and society develops the words and expressions that exist in a language.
Tell us about it's people.
People need words to convey, meaning the words in a language.
Tell us what people need to say.
There's the quotes that you've probably heard a thousand times that
Eskimos have 50 different words for different types of snow, but
this kind of idea applies to almost every language in your language.
I'm sure there are words and expressions that don't have an exact equivalent in English.
For example, in a situation where in English, you would say.
How are you in Mandarin?
You would say, have you eaten yet?
And in Cherokee native American language, there is no words for goodbye only.
I'll see you again.
These might be small differences, but they tell us a huge
amount about the culture and the people that use the language.
And when the language dies out, And without any real written or recorded evidence of
how to use it, so dies an important part of our knowledge of the people that spoke it.
And I, for one, think we should do everything we can to avoid that.
Okay, then that is it.
For this episode on endangered languages.
It is a hugely interesting topic.
And although English may be a useful language and there are many excellent reasons to learn it.
It is just one of nearly 7,000 languages that are spoken around the world.
A world where we all speak.
One of a handful of languages is a less rich, less diverse one.
But unless there is a conscious effort to protect and encourage the
speaking of these endangered languages, then that is the direction.
Then that is the direction that we are heading in.
Then that is the direction that we are heading in as always, I would love.
As always, I would love to know what you thought of this episode, especially if you speak an
endangered language, but even if you don't, you can email hi, H i@leonardoenglish.com and on
the subject of dying languages, watch out for our next members only episode, which is going
to be on Esperanto, a language that is certainly not dead, but was born artificially, I guess.
That will be released exclusively on the website on Tuesday.
So keep a lookout for that one.
And as a final reminder, if you are looking for all of the bonus episodes, plus subtitles
transcripts and keep vocabulary, then the place to go to is Leonardo english.com.
You've been listening to English, learning for curious minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Allister budge, you stay safe and I'll catch you in the next episode.